Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is a
life-threatening condition where fluid floods the alveoli due
to increased hydrostatic pressure from
left-sided heart failure.
For respiratory therapists, this is not
just a lung problem.
It's a cardiac-driven gas exchange
emergency.
When the left ventricle fails to pump
effectively, blood backs
up into the pulmonary circulation.
This increases capillary pressure, forcing
fluid out into the interstitial
space and eventually into the alveoli,
impairing oxygen diffusion.
Clinically, patients present with acute
dyspnea,
orthopnea, tachypnea, and often pink,
frothy sputum.
You may hear crackles on auscultation and
see signs of increased work of breathing,
such as accessory muscle use.
Oxygen saturation is typically low, and
ABGs often show hypoxemia
with possible respiratory alkalosis early,
progressing to respiratory acidosis if
fatigue develops.
From a diagnostic standpoint, chest X-ray
may reveal bilateral
infiltrates, often described as a batwing
pattern.
BNP levels are typically elevated, helping
differentiate cardiogenic from non-
cardiogenic causes.
Hemodynamically, these patients often have
elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
Management focuses on improving
oxygenation and reducing cardiac preload and afterload.
Oxygen therapy is initiated immediately,
and many patients benefit from
non-invasive ventilation like CPAP or
BiPAP to recruit alveoli and reduce work of
breathing.
Diuretics such as furosemide help remove
excess fluid, while vasodilators
like nitroglycerin reduce preload and
afterload, improving cardiac output.
Red flags include worsening hypoxemia,
altered mental status,
rising PaCO2, and signs of respiratory
fatigue.
These may indicate the need for intubation
and mechanical ventilation.
RT plays a critical role in monitoring
respiratory status, applying
and titrating oxygen and ventilatory
support, and recognizing early signs
of deterioration.
Quick recognition and intervention can
prevent progression to respiratory failure and improve patient outcomes.